24
Butterworth Filters

To illustrate some of the ideas developed in Lecture 23, we introduce in this lecture a simple and particularly useful class of filters referred to as Butterworth filters. Filters in this class are specified by two parameters, the cutoff frequency and the filter order. The frequency response of these filters is monotonic, and the sharpness of the transition from the passband to the stopband is dictated by the filter order. For continuous-time Butterworth filters, the poles associated with the square of the magnitude of the frequency response are equally distributed in angle on a circle in the s-plane, concentric with the origin and having a radius equal to the cutoff frequency. When the cutoff frequency and the filter order have been specified, the poles characterizing the system function are readily obtained. Once the poles are specified, it is straightforward to obtain the differential equation characterizing the filter. In this lecture, we illustrate the design of a discrete-time filter through the use of the impulse-invariant design procedure applied to a Butterworth filter. The filter specifications are given in terms of the discrete-time frequency variable and then mapped to a corresponding set of specifications for the continuous-time filter. A Butterworth filter meeting these specifications is determined. The resulting continuous-time system function is then mapped to
the desired discrete-time system function.

A limitation on the use of impulse invariance as a design procedure for discrete-time systems is the requirement that the continuous-time filter be bandlimited to avoid aliasing. An alternative procedure, called the bilinear transformation, corresponds to a mapping of the entire imaginary axis in the s-plane to once around the unit circle. Consequently, there is no aliasing introduced by this procedure. However, since the imaginary axis has infinite length and the unit circle has a finite circumference, by necessity there must be a nonlinear distortion in mapping between the two frequency axes. The use of the bilinear transformation is therefore limited to mapping filters that are approximately piecewise constant. For filters of this type, the inherent nonlinear distortion in the frequency axis is easily accommodated by prewarping the critical frequencies (e.g., passband edge and stopband edge) prior to carrying out the design of the associated continuous-time system. This procedure is illustrated with the design of a Butterworth filter.

