13
Continuous-Time
Modulation

In this lecture, we begin the discussion of modulation. This is an important concept in communication systems and, as we will see in Lecture 15, also provides the basis for converting between continuous-time and discrete-time signals. In its most general sense, modulation means using one signal to vary a parameter of another signal. In communication systems, for example, if a channel is particularly suited to transmission in a certain frequency range, the information to be transmitted may be embedded in a carrier signal matched to the channel. The mechanism by which the information is embedded is modulation; that is, the information to be transmitted is used to modulate some parameter of the carrier signal. In sinusoidal frequency modulation, for example, the information is used to modulate the carrier frequency. In sinusoidal amplitude modulation, the carrier is sinusoidal at a frequency that the channel can accommodate, and the information to be transmitted modulates the amplitude of this carrier. Furthermore, in communication systems, if many different signals are to be transmitted over the same channel, a technique referred
to as frequency division multiplexing is often used. In this method each signal is used to modulate a carrier of a different frequency so that in the composite signal the information for each of the separate signals occupies non-overlapping frequency bands.

The modulation property for Fourier transforms applies directly to amplitude modulation, that is, the interpretation in the frequency domain of the result of multiplying a carrier signal by a modulating signal. From the modulation property we know that for amplitude modulation the spectrum of the modulated output is the convolution of the spectra of the carrier and the modulating signal. When the carrier is either a complex exponential or a sinusoidal signal, the spectrum of the carrier is one or a pair of impulses and the result of the convolution is then to shift the spectrum of the modulating signal to a center frequency equal to the carrier frequency. Modulation with a single complex exponential and with a sinusoidal signal are closely related.

With a complex exponential carrier, demodulation, i.e., recovery of the original modulating signal, is relatively straightforward, basically involving modulating a second time with the complex corjugate signal. With sinusoidal amplitude modulation, demodulation consists of modulating again with a sinusoidal carrier followed by lowpass filtering to extract the original signal.
This form of demodulation is typically referred to as synchronous demodulation since it requires synchronization between the sinusoidal carrier signals in the modulator and demodulator. However, by adding a constant to the modulating signal or equivalently injecting some carrier signal into the modulated output, a simpler form of demodulator can be used. This is referred to as
asynchronous demodulation and typically results in a less expensive demodulator. However, the fact that a carrier signal is injected into the modulated signal represents an inefficiency of power transmission.

